README.md, before:

# Advanced Lane Finding for Self-Driving Cars

The goal of this project is to produce a robust pipeline for detecting lane lines given a raw image from a car's dashcam. The pipeline should output a visual display of the lane boundaries, numerical estimation of lane curvature, and vehicle position within the lane.

![Original Image](test_images/test_example1.jpeg)   ![Output Image](output_images/output_example1.jpeg)


## Files and Usage

1. camera_cal.py
    * Contains code for calibrating the camera to undistort images.
    * `python camera_cal.py` will return the camera matrix and distortion coefficients and save them in a pickle file calibration_pickle.p.
2. thresholds.py
    * Contains code for applying color and gradient thresholds to an image to better detect lane lines.
3. lane_tracker.py
    * Contains code for identifying lane lines and highlighting the lane boundaries.
4. video_generator.py
    * Contains code to generate a video with lane boundaries applied to an input video from a dashcam.
    * `python video_generator.py project_video.mp4` will save the output video as project_video_output.mp4 in the same directory.
5. image_generator.py
    * Contains code to generate images with lane boundaries applied to the test images from a dashcam.
    * `python image_generator.py` will save the output images in the output_images folder.

## Solution

### Overview

The steps taken to complete this project are as follows:

* Compute the camera calibration matrix and distortion coefficients given a set of chessboard images.
* Apply a distortion correction to raw images.
* Use color transforms and gradients to create a thresholded binary image.
* Apply a perspective transform to rectify binary image ("birds-eye view").
* Detect lane pixels and fit to find the lane boundary.
* Determine the curvature of the lane and vehicle position with respect to center.
* Warp the detected lane boundaries back onto the original image.
* Output visual display of the lane boundaries and numerical estimation of lane curvature and vehicle position.


### Camera Calibration

Cameras typically do not generate perfect images; some of the objects in the images can get stretched or scewed in various ways, especially near the edges. We can correct for this by performing a camera calibration.
I started by preparing "object points", which will be the (x,y,z) coordinates of the chessboard corners in the world. The provided sample images of chessboards are fixed on the (x,y) plane at z=0, such that the object points are the same for each calibration image. Thus, `objp` is just a replicated array of coordinates, and `objpoints` will be appended with a copy of it every time all of the chessboard corners are successfully detected in a sample image. With each successful chessboard detection, `imgpoints` will be appended with the (x,y) pixel position of each of the corners. 
I then used the output `objpoints` and `imgpoints` to compute the camera calibration and distortion coefficients using the OpenCV `calibrateCamera()` function. The resulting camera matrix and distortion coefficients are then used to undistort images using the OpenCV `undistort()` function. Here an original image (left) and an undistorted image (right):

![Original](camera_cal/test_example2.jpeg)      ![Undistorted](camera_cal/output_example2.jpeg)

The code for camera calibration is contained in `camera_cal.py` and the sample images and outputs can be found in the camera_cal folder.


### Distortion Correction

Using the camera matrix and distortion coefficients produced in the previous step, I undistort all incoming raw images using the OpenCV `undistort()` function. I use this function in my `apply_lines()` function which can be seen on line 38 of the `lane_tracker.py` file. Notice the difference in position of the white car between the raw image (left) and undistorted image (right):

![Original Image](test_images/test_example1.jpeg)   ![Undistorted](output_images/example_undist1.jpeg)


### Thresholded Binary Images

In order to accurately find the lane lines in an image, I applied a number of thresholding techniques to filter out potential noise (such as shadows, different color lanes, other cars, etc). I first applied a color threshold, where I save only the R (red) channel of the RGB image, and combine it with the S (saturation) channel of the image after converting it to HLS space. The reason I keep the red channel is because it does a good job of preserving the lanes in the image, but especially the yellow lane which other filters sometimes fail to detect. The binary image of the R channel (left) and the S channel (right) can be seen below:

![R Binary](output_images/example_rthresh1.jpeg)  ![S Binary](output_images/example_sthresh1.jpeg)

Next, I apply thresholds on the gradients using the OpenCV `Sobel()` function. I apply a threshold on the magnitude of the gradient to filter out weak signals using the `mag_thresh()` function which can be found starting on line 6 of the `thresholds.py` file. I apply a threshold on the direction of the gradient in order to filter out horizonal lines, as the lane lines should be relatively vertical. You can find this `dir_thresh()` function starting on line 30 of the `thresholds.py` file. The binary image using the magnitude threshold (left) and directional threshold (right) can be seen below:

![Mag Binary](output_images/example_magthresh1.jpeg)  ![Dir Binary](output_images/example_dirthresh1.jpeg)

The binary images produced when combining both color thresholds (left) and both gradient thresholds (right):

![Color Binary](output_images/example_colorthresh1.jpeg)  ![Grad Binary](output_images/example_gradthresh1.jpeg)

I then combine the color and gradient thresholded binary images to produce the final binary image used in the pipeline for detecting the lane lines. You can see the original undistorted image (left) compared with the thresholded binary image (right) below:

![Color Binary](output_images/example_undist2.jpeg)  ![Grad Binary](output_images/example_combothresh1.jpeg)

The code for producing the thresholded binary images can be found in `thresholds.py` and some sample output images can be found in the output_images folder.


### Perspective Transform

A perspective transform maps the points in a given image to a different, desired, image points with a new perspective. I use the OpenCV functions getPerspectiveTransform() and warpPerspective() to generate a bird's-eye view of a lane from above, which is useful for calculating the lane curvature. I chose the source points and destination points used to perform the transform following the example given in the course:
```
src = np.float32(
    [[(img_size[0] / 2) - 55, img_size[1] / 2 + 100],
    [((img_size[0] / 6) - 10), img_size[1]],
    [(img_size[0] * 5 / 6) + 60, img_size[1]],
    [(img_size[0] / 2 + 55), img_size[1] / 2 + 100]])
dst = np.float32(
    [[(img_size[0] / 4), 0],
    [(img_size[0] / 4), img_size[1]],
    [(img_size[0] * 3 / 4), img_size[1]],
    [(img_size[0] * 3 / 4), 0]])
```
Using these points resulted in the following undistorted image (left) transformed to a bird's-eye perspective (right):

![Undist](output_images/example_undist3.jpeg)  ![Bird's-eye](output_images/example_birdseye1.jpeg)

Below is the same applied to the thresholded binary image as described in the previous step:

![Undist](output_images/example_undist3.jpeg)  ![Bird's-eye](output_images/example_binarybirdseye1.jpeg)

The code for performing the perspective transform can be found on lines 54-70 in the `lane_tracker.py` file.


### Detect Lane Pixels and Fit

Commit message:

Complete Detect Lane Pixels and Fit Lines section of README.md

README.md, after:

# Advanced Lane Finding for Self-Driving Cars

The goal of this project is to produce a robust pipeline for detecting lane lines given a raw image from a car's dashcam. The pipeline should output a visual display of the lane boundaries, numerical estimation of lane curvature, and vehicle position within the lane.

![Original Image](test_images/test_example1.jpeg)   ![Output Image](output_images/output_example1.jpeg)


## Files and Usage

1. camera_cal.py
    * Contains code for calibrating the camera to undistort images.
    * `python camera_cal.py` will return the camera matrix and distortion coefficients and save them in a pickle file calibration_pickle.p.
2. thresholds.py
    * Contains code for applying color and gradient thresholds to an image to better detect lane lines.
3. lane_tracker.py
    * Contains code for identifying lane lines and highlighting the lane boundaries.
4. video_generator.py
    * Contains code to generate a video with lane boundaries applied to an input video from a dashcam.
    * `python video_generator.py project_video.mp4` will save the output video as project_video_output.mp4 in the same directory.
5. image_generator.py
    * Contains code to generate images with lane boundaries applied to the test images from a dashcam.
    * `python image_generator.py` will save the output images in the output_images folder.

## Solution

### Overview

The steps taken to complete this project are as follows:

* Compute the camera calibration matrix and distortion coefficients given a set of chessboard images.
* Apply a distortion correction to raw images.
* Use color transforms and gradients to create a thresholded binary image.
* Apply a perspective transform to rectify binary image ("birds-eye view").
* Detect lane pixels and fit to find the lane boundary.
* Determine the curvature of the lane and vehicle position with respect to center.
* Warp the detected lane boundaries back onto the original image.
* Output visual display of the lane boundaries and numerical estimation of lane curvature and vehicle position.


### Camera Calibration

Cameras typically do not generate perfect images; some of the objects in the images can get stretched or scewed in various ways, especially near the edges. We can correct for this by performing a camera calibration.
I started by preparing "object points", which will be the (x,y,z) coordinates of the chessboard corners in the world. The provided sample images of chessboards are fixed on the (x,y) plane at z=0, such that the object points are the same for each calibration image. Thus, `objp` is just a replicated array of coordinates, and `objpoints` will be appended with a copy of it every time all of the chessboard corners are successfully detected in a sample image. With each successful chessboard detection, `imgpoints` will be appended with the (x,y) pixel position of each of the corners. 
I then used the output `objpoints` and `imgpoints` to compute the camera calibration and distortion coefficients using the OpenCV `calibrateCamera()` function. The resulting camera matrix and distortion coefficients are then used to undistort images using the OpenCV `undistort()` function. Here an original image (left) and an undistorted image (right):

![Original](camera_cal/test_example2.jpeg)      ![Undistorted](camera_cal/output_example2.jpeg)

The code for camera calibration is contained in `camera_cal.py` and the sample images and outputs can be found in the camera_cal folder.


### Distortion Correction

Using the camera matrix and distortion coefficients produced in the previous step, I undistort all incoming raw images using the OpenCV `undistort()` function. I use this function in my `apply_lines()` function which can be seen on line 38 of the `lane_tracker.py` file. Notice the difference in position of the white car between the raw image (left) and undistorted image (right):

![Original Image](test_images/test_example1.jpeg)   ![Undistorted](output_images/example_undist1.jpeg)


### Thresholded Binary Images

In order to accurately find the lane lines in an image, I applied a number of thresholding techniques to filter out potential noise (such as shadows, different color lanes, other cars, etc). I first applied a color threshold, where I save only the R (red) channel of the RGB image, and combine it with the S (saturation) channel of the image after converting it to HLS space. The reason I keep the red channel is because it does a good job of preserving the lanes in the image, but especially the yellow lane which other filters sometimes fail to detect. The binary image of the R channel (left) and the S channel (right) can be seen below:

![R Binary](output_images/example_rthresh1.jpeg)  ![S Binary](output_images/example_sthresh1.jpeg)

Next, I apply thresholds on the gradients using the OpenCV `Sobel()` function. I apply a threshold on the magnitude of the gradient to filter out weak signals using the `mag_thresh()` function which can be found starting on line 6 of the `thresholds.py` file. I apply a threshold on the direction of the gradient in order to filter out horizonal lines, as the lane lines should be relatively vertical. You can find this `dir_thresh()` function starting on line 30 of the `thresholds.py` file. The binary image using the magnitude threshold (left) and directional threshold (right) can be seen below:

![Mag Binary](output_images/example_magthresh1.jpeg)  ![Dir Binary](output_images/example_dirthresh1.jpeg)

The binary images produced when combining both color thresholds (left) and both gradient thresholds (right):

![Color Binary](output_images/example_colorthresh1.jpeg)  ![Grad Binary](output_images/example_gradthresh1.jpeg)

I then combine the color and gradient thresholded binary images to produce the final binary image used in the pipeline for detecting the lane lines. You can see the original undistorted image (left) compared with the thresholded binary image (right) below:

![Color Binary](output_images/example_undist2.jpeg)  ![Grad Binary](output_images/example_combothresh1.jpeg)

The code for producing the thresholded binary images can be found in `thresholds.py` and some sample output images can be found in the output_images folder.


### Perspective Transform

A perspective transform maps the points in a given image to a different, desired, image points with a new perspective. I use the OpenCV functions getPerspectiveTransform() and warpPerspective() to generate a bird's-eye view of a lane from above, which is useful for calculating the lane curvature. I chose the source points and destination points used to perform the transform following the example given in the course:
```
src = np.float32(
    [[(img_size[0] / 2) - 55, img_size[1] / 2 + 100],
    [((img_size[0] / 6) - 10), img_size[1]],
    [(img_size[0] * 5 / 6) + 60, img_size[1]],
    [(img_size[0] / 2 + 55), img_size[1] / 2 + 100]])
dst = np.float32(
    [[(img_size[0] / 4), 0],
    [(img_size[0] / 4), img_size[1]],
    [(img_size[0] * 3 / 4), img_size[1]],
    [(img_size[0] * 3 / 4), 0]])
```
Using these points resulted in the following undistorted image (left) transformed to a bird's-eye perspective (right):

![Undist](output_images/example_undist3.jpeg)  ![Bird's-eye](output_images/example_birdseye1.jpeg)

Below is the same applied to the thresholded binary image as described in the previous step:

![Undist](output_images/example_undist3.jpeg)  ![Bird's-eye](output_images/example_binarybirdseye1.jpeg)

The code for performing the perspective transform can be found on lines 54-70 in the `lane_tracker.py` file.


### Detect Lane Pixels and Fit Lines

To find the pixels of the lane lines I take a histogram of the thresholded binary image by adding up the pixel values along each column in the lower half of the image using `np.sum(img[img.shape[0]/2:,:], axis=0)` as seen on line 85 of the `lane_tracker.py` file. Since pixels are either 0 or 1 in my binary image, the two most prominent peaks in the histogram will be good indicators of the x-position of the base of the lane lines. I then use that as a starting point for where to search for the lane lines, using a sliding window places around the line centers to find and follow the lines up to the top of the frame. A plot of such a histogram can be seen below:

![Histogram](output_images/lane_pixel_histogram.png)

After saving all of the pixel indicies within the windows of interest, I use the numpy `polyfit()` function to fit a second order line to the pixels in the left and right lanes. To increase efficiency, after finding the lane lines I avoid doing an exhaustive search in subsequent frames by instead only searching within a margin around the previous found line positions. A plot of the search windows and the fitted lane lines are shown below:

![Line Fit](output_images/binary_lines_fit3.jpg) 

The code to detect the lane pixels and fit the lines can be found on lines 80-146 of the `lane_tracker.py` file.
